docs: setup without wizards (#788)
input-output-hk/partner-chains: docs/user-guides/manual-setup.md

# Partner chains setup

> Partner Chains provides text based CLIs, for setting up a partner chain and starting nodes, called wizards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Partner Chains toolkit provides text based wizards for setting up a partner chain and running a node.
```

Author: I'll adapt wizards, but I want to not tell here about running a node. This is setup guide.

> In the [chain builder](./chain-builder.md), [permissioned node owner](./permissioned.md), and [registered node owner](./registered.md) guides these wizards are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These wizards are used in the [chain builder](./chain-builder.md), [permissioned node owner](./permissioned.md), and [registered node owner](./registered.md) guides.
```

> This document explains what is performed by those wizards and how to perform such operations manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document explains what these wizards do and how to perform these operations manually.
```

For dependency setup please see the respective guide for your desired setup.

## Generating keys

> `<node-executable> wizards generate-keys` creates 3 specific keys, stores them in the keystore and also creates a JSON file with public keys.

Reviewer 2: Instead of always writing `<node-executable>` I would suggest to just introduce `pc-node` as the node executable. That also makes all the invocations below look a bit less alien because we are actually looking at commands that are to be run in a shell.

These 3 keys are:
* Aura, sr25519 scheme key, with "key-type" `aura`
* GRANDPA, ed25519 scheme key, with "key-type" `gran`
* cross-chain, ecdsa scheme key, with "key-type" `crch`

> For each of these key commands that are two commands invoked by wizard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each of these keys, two commands are invoked by the wizard.
```

The first one is
```bash

> <node-executable> key generate --scheme <scheme> --output-type json

Reviewer 2: So based on what I suggested above this would be
```
$ pc-node key generate --scheme <scheme> --output-type json
```
which to me looks a bit more "natural"

Author: But there is no such a thing like `pc-node`, so I prefer to be clear that it is something that will vary.

```

> , that has `secretPhrase` and `publicKey` fields in the output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which outputs a Json containing fields `secretPhrase` and `publicKey`.
```

Please do save these outputs as they are needed in the subsequent steps.

The second one is
```bash
<node-executable> key insert --keystore-path <base-path>/keystore --scheme <scheme> --key-type <key-type> --suri <secretPhrase>
```
that stores the generated key in the keystore.

> Commands above serve as instructions for generating and inserting required key in the keystore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commands above can be used to manually generate and insert the required key into the keystore.
```

Author: This is already changed by Nick suggestion. I'll stick with his version.

If there is a need for keys of different schema or type, or in different location, the instructions above should be used to insert it.

> The wizard can also generate node network key, using following commands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The wizard can also generate node network key, using the following commands:
```

```bash
mkdir -p <base-path>/network
mkdir key generate-node-key --file <base-path>/network/secret_ed25519
```

Please note that running node will require using `--base-path`, `--keystore-path` and `--node-key-file` to match the layout used above.

## Prepare configuration

`<node-executable> wizards prepare-configuration` sets up partner chain governance on the main chain and computes additional parameters that are used in later steps of the setup.

### Establishing partner chain on Cardano

> Each partner chain is identified by the Genesis UTXO and it has some governance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each partner chain is identified by the Genesis UTXO and has a governance authority.
```

Use `<node-executable> smart-contracts governance init -c <GENESIS_UTXO> -g <GOVERNANCE_AUTHORITY> -t <THRESHOLD> -k <PAYMENT_KEY_FILE>`
command to spend the UTXO that will become the Genesis UTXO of your chain.
The Genesis UTXO has to be spendable by the payment key.

> This command initializes governance of the chain as M of N multisig parametrized by GOVERNANCE_AUTHORITY and THRESHOLD parameters.

Reviewer 2: While it is implicitly clear what `GENESIS_UTXO` is, it isn't explicit what `GOVERNANCE_AUTHORITY` is and where it comes from. Same goes for `THRESHOLD`: not clear with what value/type that would be invoked.

Maybe it would be nice to have example invocations for all commands in here? And the explicit listing of the argument names etc can be left to https://github.com/input-output-hk/partner-chains/pull/811 once that is merged?

> Note: for more details please read [smart-contracts commands documentation](../../toolkit/smart-contracts/commands/readme.md).

Reviewer 2: Let's not link to something that doesn't yet exist. It's arguably worse than not linking to anything at all :)

Author: I'll link to the part of intro in your PR. I was expecting to put docs to the crate that defines commands.

### Discover smart-contracts addresses and script hashes

> Use `<node-executable> smart-contracts get-scripts -c <GENESIS_UTXO>` to obtain Cardano addresses and scripts hashes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `<node-executable> smart-contracts get-scripts -c <GENESIS_UTXO>` to obtain Cardano addresses and scripts hashes used by the partner chain smart contracts.
```

> This guide assumes that the output is saved to `addresses.json` file.

Reviewer 2: Here I would again suggest to write out a full example and probably also show the the output generated in `addresses.json`. Making it more concrete helps readers to follow along.

Author: Done

### Establish bootnodes

> Wizard perpares one bootnode address that is derived from the generated node network key and user input.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The wizard prepares one bootnode address that is derived from the generated node network key and user input.
```

> This guide does not cover bootnodes as not partner chains specific topic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This guide does not cover bootnodes as it is not a partner chains specific topic.
```

Partner chains do not add any requirements nor capabilities in regards to bootnodes.

## Create chain-spec file

`<node-executable> wizards create-chain-spec` uses data from the previous step to generate chain-spec file.
It is important to understand that most of chain-spec file generation is delegated to `<node-exectuable>` itself.

> Specifically, wizard sets some specific environment variables and assumes that `<node-exectuable> build-spec` will use and that it will not require any other variables.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifically, the wizard sets some specific environment variables and assumes that `<node-executable> build-spec` will use and that it will not require any other variables.
```

> Specifically, the wizard sets some specific environment variables and assumes that `<node-executable> build-spec` will use and that it will not require any other variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, the wizard sets some specific environment variables and assumes that `<node-executable> build-spec` will use them and does not require any other variables.
```

> Because what `<node-exectuable> build-spec` uses and requires is finally in control of the chain builder, the following command can only be seens as an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because what `<node-exectuable> build-spec` uses and requires is ultimately up to the chain builder, the following command can only be seen as an example:
```

```bash
export COMMITTEE_CANDIDATE_ADDRESS=$(jq -r '.addresses.CommitteeCandidateValidator' addresses.json)
export D_PARAMETER_POLICY_ID=$(jq -r '.policyIds.DParameter' addresses.json)
export PERMISSIONED_CANDIDATES_POLICY_ID=$(jq -r '.policyIds.PermissionedCandidates' addresses.json)
export ILLIQUID_SUPPLY_VALIDATOR_ADDRESS=$(jq -r '.addresses.IlliquidCirculationSupplyValidator' addresses.json)
export NATIVE_TOKEN_POLICY_ID='0x00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000'
export NATIVE_TOKEN_ASSET_NAME=''
```
Native token policy and asset name are out of partner chains control, they should be known by the chain builder.

> For chains that do not intent to use them, it is assumed that `<node-exectuable> build-spec` will not need them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For chains that do not intend to use them, it is assumed that `<node-exectuable> build-spec` will not need them.
```

Run `<node-executable> build-spec --disable-default-bootnode > chain-spec.json`.
As stated above, the content of the file depends mostly on `<node-executable>`.

Please consult our [intro doc chain-spec](../intro.md#chain-spec.json) section and update all the required fields, most notably:
* `genesisUtxo` and `slotsPerEpoch` of Sidechain Pallet
* `initialValidators` of Partner Chains Session Pallet
* `initialAuthorities` of Session Validator Management Pallet

> * all occurrances `mainChainScripts`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* all occurrances of `mainChainScripts`
```

## Setup D-parameter and permissioned Permissioned Candidates

> `<node-executable> wizards setup-main-chain-state` guides user through creating (and conditionally submitting) two transactions that set up smart-contracts state.

Reviewer 2: I think we should make a clear distinction on what this **guide** is about. We seem to be oscillating between describing what wizards do and outlining how to set up a chain without wizards.

I think we want the latter. So we would mostly just explain that wizards exist and can be used but then go on to to explain the necessary steps to create a chain as if wizards didn't exist at all - in a way that someone who hasn't done this before would be able to follow along and do the same. WDYT?

The first one sets the D-parameter.

> `<node-executable> smart-contracts upsert-d-parameter` is the lower level command that can be used for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`<node-executable> smart-contracts upsert-d-parameter` is the low-level command that can be used for this.
```

Author: The low-level is cardano-cli submit transaction or HTTP request to ogmios.

I will remove "lower". I realize it isn't low level at all.

The second one sets the permissioned candidates.
`<node-executable> smart-contracts upsert-permissioned-candidates` is the command to set permissioned candidates.

For more details, please refer to [smart-contracts commands documentation](../../toolkit/smart-contracts/commands/readme.md).

Please note that partner chains committee selection feature will use this data only after two Cardano epoch boundaries.

> If these transactions were submitted in the epoch N, then committee selection will use this data from epoch N+2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If these transactions were submitted in the epoch N, then committee selection will use this data starting from epoch N+2.
```

## Running partner chains node

> `<node-executable> wizards start-node` sets up environment variables required for following Cardano and runs `<node-executable> --validator --chain chain-spec.json --base-path <BASE_PATH> --keystore-path <KEYSTORE_PATH> --node-key-file <NODE_KEY_FILE> --port <WSPORT> <BOOTNODES_PARAMETERS>`.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
`<node-executable> wizards start-node` sets up environment variables required for following Cardano and runs:
```bash
<node-executable> --validator \
    --chain chain-spec.json \
    --base-path <BASE_PATH> \
    --keystore-path <KEYSTORE_PATH> \
    --node-key-file <NODE_KEY_FILE> \
    --port <WSPORT> \
    <BOOTNODES_PARAMETERS>
```
````

For setting the environment variables please consult [the documentation here](../intro.md#environment-variables).

Other parameters are regular substrate node parameters.

> Use them accordingly to your setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use them accordingly for your setup.
```

## Register as committee candidate

For dependencies setup and broader context please read [registered guide](./registered.md).

This guide presents commands that could be used instead of `register1`, `register2`, and `register3` wizards.

### Getting signatures

Registration requires posting a message containing signatures to Cardano.

> These signatures prove that an SPO wants to be regarded as committee candidate for given partner chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These signatures prove that an SPO is the owner of the keys being registered,
and wants to be considered for committee membership for a given partner chain.
```

Use:
```bash
<node-executable> registration-signatures \
  --genesis-utxo <GENESIS_UTXO> \
  --mainchain-signing-key <STAKE_POOL_OPERATOR_SIGNING_KEY> \
  --sidechain-signing-key <PARTNER_CHAIN_SIGNING_KEY> \
  --registration-utxo <REGISTRATION_UTXO>
```
* GENESIS_UTXO is the UTXO that identifies a partner chain
* STAKE_POOL_OPERATOR_SIGNING_KEY is the `cborHex` without the first 4 characters of _StakePoolSigningKey_ed25519_ key file.
This is cold key, therefore this command is intented to be used on an offline machine.

> * PARTNER_CHAIN_SIGNING_KEY is hex of the ecdsa key created the first step of this guide, `secretSeed` field of the `key generate` output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* PARTNER_CHAIN_SIGNING_KEY is hex of the ecdsa key created during the first step of this guide (the `secretSeed` field of the `key generate` output).
```

> * REGISTRATION_UTXO is a UTXO that SPO is able to spent when posting the message with signature. It prevents replay attacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* REGISTRATION_UTXO is a UTXO that SPO is able to spend when posting the message with signature. It prevents replay attacks.
```

The command outputs a JSON with following fields:
* `spo_public_key` - derived from STAKE_POOL_OPERATOR_SIGNING_KEY
* `spo_signature` - signature of a _registration message_ made with STAKE_POOL_OPERATOR_SIGNING_KEY signing key
* `sidechain_public_key` - derived from PARTNER_CHAIN_SIGNING_KEY
* `sidechain_signature` - signature of a _registration message_ made with STAKE_POOL_OPERATOR_SIGNING_KEY signing key

Note: the _registration message_ is composed of the genesis UTXO, sidechain public key, and registration UTXO.

### Submitting registration

> Having this data obtained on an offline machine, it should be used on an online one to submit registration transaction to Cardano.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having this data obtained on an offline machine, it should be used on an online one to submit the registration transaction to Cardano.
```

Use the `<node-executable> smart-contracts register` command.
There are two parameters requiring explanation:

> * `partner-chain-signature` - use `sidechain_signature` field of `registration-signatures`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `partner-chain-signature` - use `sidechain_signature` field of `registration-signatures`'s output
```

* `partner-chain-public-keys` - use `<PARTNER_CHAIN_SIGNING_KEY>:<AURA_KEY>:<GRANDPA_KEY>`,
where AURA_KEY and GRANDPA_KEY are obtained in same way as PARTNER_CHAIN_SIGNING_KEY was obtained for the `registration-signatures` command.

> After this command is executed registration should become "effective" after two Cardano epochs boundaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this command is executed registration should become "effective" after two Cardano epoch boundaries.
```
